.TH local-apt 8 "February 2026" "local-apt" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
local-apt \- download packages from configured sources and update local APT repository
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B local-apt
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B local-apt
downloads Debian package (.deb) files from URLs configured in
.IR /etc/local-apt/packages.txt ,
installs them into the local repository pool, and updates the repository
metadata.
.PP
The command parses the TOML configuration file, downloads each enabled
package, extracts package metadata, automatically determines the correct
pool directory path following Debian conventions, and regenerates
repository metadata using
.BR apt-ftparchive (1).
.PP
The command performs the following operations:
.IP \(bu 2
Acquires an exclusive lock to prevent concurrent runs
.IP \(bu 2
Parses the TOML configuration file
.IP \(bu 2
For each enabled package:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Downloads the .deb file using
.BR wget (1)
with timestamping to avoid unnecessary downloads
.IP \(bu 2
Validates it is a valid Debian package
.IP \(bu 2
Extracts package name and architecture using
.BR dpkg-deb (1)
.IP \(bu 2
Auto-generates the target path following Debian pool convention
.br
(pool/main/<first-letter>/<package-name>/)
.IP \(bu 2
Moves the package to the appropriate directory
.RE
.IP \(bu 2
Regenerates repository metadata using
.BR apt-ftparchive (1)
.IP \(bu 2
Logs all operations to syslog
.PP
If individual package downloads fail, the command continues processing
remaining packages and updates the repository with partial progress.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/local-apt/packages.txt
TOML configuration file defining package sources
.TP
.I /var/lib/local-apt/pool/main/
Package storage directory
.TP
.I /run/lock/local-apt.lock
Lock file to prevent concurrent execution
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LOCAL_APT_CONFIG
If set, specifies an alternate configuration file location
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
Success \- at least one package was successfully downloaded and repository updated
.TP
1
Failure \- configuration file not found, already running, or no packages downloaded
.SH EXAMPLES
Download configured packages and update repository:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo local-apt update
.fi
.RE
.PP
Use an alternate configuration file:
.PP
.RS
.nf
sudo LOCAL_APT_CONFIG=/etc/local-apt/test-packages.txt local-apt update
.fi
.RE
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration file uses a simple text format with one URL per line.
.PP
Lines starting with
.B #
are treated as comments and ignored.
Empty lines are also ignored.
To disable a package, comment out its line.
.PP
Example configuration:
.PP
.RS
.nf
# Discord package
https://discord.com/api/download?platform=linux&format=deb

# Google Chrome (disabled)
# https://dl.google.com/linux/direct/google-chrome-stable_current_amd64.deb
.fi
.RE
.SH LOGGING
All operations are logged to syslog with the
.B local-apt
tag. Messages are also written to stdout/stderr.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR apt-ftparchive (1),
.BR dpkg-deb (1),
.BR flock (1)
